
16www.nust.edu.pk
Prospectus 2025
NUST Information and Communication Technologies (ICT)
Provision of ICT facilities and services to NUST faculty, students and administrative staff is the core functional role of ICT Directorate.
The directorate is a service provider at NUST Main Campus, Sector H-12 Islamabad and support services to Schools and constituent
Colleges. The landscape of to provide Quality of Service (QoS) to our valued users is broadly laid out as under:
ICT Infrastructure
NUST offers most modern computing and networking facilities and has the distinction of providing internet access since early
nineties. These include:
» Main Data Center, which is the hub for dissemination of all ICT services to NUST community.
» Campus Optical Fiber Network, connecting all buildings with Main Data Center.
» Gigabit Local Area Networks (LANs) in all Schools.
» High-speed Internet facility to the users through Pakistan Education and Research Network (PERN) program of Higher Education
Commission (HEC).
» Latest high-speed Wi-Fi connecting is established in all hostels under Smart University Project (SUP) through HEC.
» Central Authentication of all hostel Wi-Fi users for secured Internet access.
» Computing laboratories are equipped with state-of-the-art servers, computers, software and allied equipment, which are
connected through high speed LAN.
» NUST software defined based Intranet is in place connecting all remote Campuses with Main Campus for information and
resource sharing.
» Jinnah auditorium is installed with Pakistan’s largest fixed P2.5 SMD video wall with dimensions of 13x29 and high resolution
graphics capability.
Qalam – Campus Management Solution
NUST ICT implemented a campus management solution in Fall 2015. In Fall 2020, this was replaced by an indigenously developed
software system known as Qalam. Qalam is the automation of the complete student academic life cycle processes and it covers the
whole spectrum of the academic activities from student admission till graduation.
Student Life Cycle
Qalam revolutionizes student lifecycle management by providing a user-friendly platform that allows students to effortlessly access
and oversee their academic journey. This innovative system enables students to conveniently utilize a range of online services, all
from the comfort of their homes. The following key modules/applications on Qalam facilitate students throughout their academic
lifecycle:
Student Admission
This application seamlessly enrolls students into the Qalam framework upon their successful admission to NUST.
Online Career Counseling Application
The Online Career Counselling App allows students to register for sessions easily. Each student is assigned a dedicated mental
health professional, who receives session details and schedules through their account. Students can also seek referrals and provide
feedback on their counselling sessions.
Course Enrolment
Course Enrollment empowers students to independently enroll in the offered courses. It also provides students with the ability to
track their current, active, or past enrollments for a comprehensive overview of their academic journey.
Attendance
The Attendance module allows students to track their attendance, communicate with faculty about unmarked attendance, ensuring
transparency. Students are advised to maintain a minimum 75% attendance for a smooth academic journey.
Gradebook
The Gradebook app enables faculty to add grades of students individually in the system. It also empowers students to conveniently
monitor their assigned grades online, enhancing transparency and serving as a valuable resource for tracking academic progress
across courses.
Student Advisory System
A Student Advisory System is a support and guidance system that provides students with academic and personal assistance
throughout their educational journey. This application offers the option of guidance on course selection, career planning, and
addresses students’ concerns and needs to both students and faculty within Qalam. Groups of students can be created and
categorized as per the advisory needed by the group.
17www.nust.edu.pk
Prospectus 2025
Student Financial
The Student Financial Application efficiently handles fee
matters, including invoice generation and payment. Students
can easily download and upload fee invoices, ensuring a
streamlined financial transaction process.
Research Thesis Tracking and Management System - RTTM
The Research Thesis Tracking Module (RTTM) empowers
students to initiate and manage their theses seamlessly on
Qalam. This module ensures that students, advisors, and
management can effectively track the progress of the thesis,
fostering clear communication and collaboration throughout
the research process.
Financial Aid
The Financial Aid module adds the functionalities of scholarship
award and fee waivers. This application is interlinked with
the Students Financial application and does not generate
fee invoices to scholarship awardees and generates updated
invoices to the students with fee waivers.
Lab Equipment Management System
The Lab Equipment Management System streamlines equipment
issuance to students and faculty, ensuring traceability and
efficient tracking. Users can check equipment availability and
status in the catalogue, promoting effective management. Lab
Engineers can explore the catalogue for equipment in other
labs, optimizing resource utilization.
Hostel Management
The Hostel Management app simplifies student accommodation
registration, utilizing predefined merit criteria for automated
allocation. This ensures fair and efficient assignment, adding
transparency and objectivity to the process for an enhanced
student experience.
Mess Management
Mess Management empowers students to efficiently handle
dining affairs, including check-in/check-out, bill generation, and
payments. It offers a comprehensive view of payment history,
ensuring convenient control and contributing to a smoother
dining experience.
ICT Help Desk
The ICT Help Desk system allows students to raise tickets for
issues, monitoring progress efficiently. Concerns are directed
to relevant officers for streamlined resolution. Updates on
each complaint’s status and resolution are available, ensuring a
transparent and responsive support experience.
Student Self Services
Qalam offers a comprehensive suite of student-centric
features, enhancing the overall academic experience. From the
convenience of the Student Self Service portal, students can
seamlessly navigate through attendance monitoring, internship
enrollment, and access fee invoices. The platform further
facilitates students in managing their academic journey by
providing options for course offers and self-enrollment, viewing
grades, and accessing unofficial transcripts. Additionally, the
system ensures effective communication through feedback
and notifications, fostering a streamlined and efficient student
engagement ecosystem.
Faculty Lifecycle
Qalam’s user-friendly platform goes beyond students to
streamline faculty lifecycle management. This intuitive system
provides faculty members with easy access to oversee teaching
and research, enhancing efficiency and accessibility from
the comfort of their homes. Following are main modules of
Faculty’s lifecycle on Qalam:
NUST Research Portal
The NUST Research Portal empowers faculty members and
researchers by providing a centralized platform for showcasing
their research work, projects, and patents. To enhance the
research quantification process, we have integrated essential
research frameworks into the portal. Furthermore, dynamic
graphs and reports have been incorporated to visually highlight
the impact of the research activities at NUST.
Faculty Resource Center
The Faculty Resource Center in NUST’s Academics Directorate
uploads policies and official documents onto Qalam for
structured categorization. Faculty members and officers can
easily access these documents through their Qalam accounts,
promoting quick and efficient reference.
Faculty Self-Service
Within the Faculty Self-Service platform, professors and
educators benefit from a comprehensive suite of tools tailored
to streamline their responsibilities. From managing personal
profiles, including updates, and viewing HR information, to
overseeing research, intellectual property, and projects profiles,
this system ensures a holistic approach to faculty engagement.
Faculty members can efficiently handle administrative tasks
such as marking attendance and grading, while also actively
participating in guiding students through industrial visits, mock
interviews, and internship management. The platform further
facilitates communication through feedback and survey forms,
creating a centralized and efficient hub for faculty engagement
and support.
NUST Official Web Portal
The official university web portal serves as the central platform
for all academic-related activities, providing students with all the
information they need. The website provides comprehensive
information about the university, including information about
the academic programs, courses that are offered, and on-
campus facilities they can use. With a user-friendly interface and
easy-to-navigate design, the website is the primary resource for
students looking for information about the university.
NUST Admission Portal
The admission portal has revolutionized the admission process,
making it simpler and more convenient than before. With the
admission portal available 24x7, applicants can undertake all
admission activities such as applying for admission, generating
admit cards, and uploading relevant documents without
having to physically visit the university. Also, the applicants
can conveniently access and track their application status from
anywhere along with the fully automated merit-generating
system which enables a faster and more accurate assessment
of their admission without any human interaction.
18www.nust.edu.pk
Prospectus 2025
Student Affairs
Students Affairs Directorate primarily deals with Student’s
Clubs & Societies and extra-curricular activities. The Clubs &
Societies were established in 2011 with the purpose to provide
an opportunity to students to exhibit their potential and passion
to nurture leadership and managerial abilities. The Directorate
has evolved as a vibrant set-up providing suitable platforms to
students to pursue their passion for extra-curricular activities
and explore their potential to grow as wholesome person with
skills to lead and work in teams.
Clubs and Societies
Hundreds of events covering a diverse landscape of activities
are planned, led and executed by the students every year
through the platform of Clubs & Societies under the umbrella of
Student Affairs Directorate. The Clubs and Societies functional
at NUST are as under:
» NUST Archery Club
» NUST Skill Development Club
» NUST Bio Reach Society
» NUST Leaders Society
» NUST Water Sports Club
» NUST Debating Society
» NUST Quiz Club
» NUST Music Society
» NUST Economics Club
» NUST Media Club
» NUST Law Society
» NUST Ni Hao Club
» NUST Dramatics Club
» NUST Social Innovation Society
» NUST Fine Arts Club
» NUST Stray Animal Club
» NUST Environment Club
» NUST Technical Amusement Club
» NUST Adventure Club
» NUST Bazm e Pakistan
» NUST Book Club
» NUST Digital Club
» NUST Materials Society
» NUST Science Society
» NUST Literary Circle
» American Institute of Chemical Engineers - AIChE
» NUST Fitness Club
» NUST Excursion Club
» NUST Hack Club
» NUST Entrepreneurs Club
» NUST IEEE Club
» NUST Paragliding Club
» NUST Robotics Club
» NUST Community Services Club
» NUST Character Building Society
» American Society of Mechanical Engineering
» NUST IMEchE
» NUST ASHRAE
» NUST Physics and Astronomy Society
» NUST Trekking Club
» NUST Chess Club
Human Resource Management/Development
NUST is a multi-campus university employing faculty and staff from diverse disciplines. The HR Directorate recruits and retains the
best workforce to contribute towards the continuing success of the University. It is actively engaged in development of faculty and
staff to ensure high standard and quality of education.
The faculty at NUST is actively engaged in research activities and providing an environment of practical learning to the students. The
HR Directorate supports such programmes for the faculty to keep their expertise up-to-date and develop their skills continuously.
Eligible faculty is sent abroad for higher studies and research programmes, and is also assisted for placement in various schools
on their return.
Career development is another notable function carried out by the HR Directorate. It has successfully carried forward the progress
of the University to operate at an optimal level in times of financial crunch by exploring/offering fully funded scholarships.
Faculty Development Programme
The programme was started in 2002. As many as 430 scholars have been sent abroad for higher studies, out of which 316 have
joined back.
19www.nust.edu.pk
Prospectus 2025
Vision
The Student Affairs Directorate strives to be creative with
maximum student participation and purposeful fun activities
that help the students’ learning process and augment their
personality development as future leaders.
Administrative Aspects
All Clubs adhere to the following approved appointments:
» Faculty Sponsor
» President
» General Secretary
» Press Secretary
» Treasurer
Half the Office Bearers must be from institutions other than the
sponsor institution.
Scope of the Clubs & Societies
Every Club and Society has its own defined mandate / scope,
aim and objectives which are in sync with their respective title.
National Level Events
The Directorate, in collaboration with selected Clubs and
Societies, conducts national level events like National Science
Bee, National Literary Festival etc each year as per the schedule
of events.
Summer School
An initiative of Student Affairs Directorate, with the aim to
provide pre-University experience to FSC/O level students who
are aspiring to join the university. It is a quality time investment
for the prospective university students to understand the eco
system of university life and helps them make correct career
choices.
High Achievers Award
Student Affairs Directorate arranges the prestigious ceremony
once a year to recognize and certify the efforts of the students
who had achieved distinction at International, National or Inter-
varsity level events / competitions.
NUST Olympiad
Student Affairs Directorate arranges NUST Olympiad biannually.
It is a mega event and caters all the disciplines ranging from
Science, Technology, Literature, Adventure, Entrepreneurship,
Media and Sports.
Orientation Week
Conducted in September every year by the Student Affairs
Directorate to extend warm welcome to the freshmen and
ensure their smooth and seamless transition into the life at
NUST.
Lapel Pin Ceremony
The ceremony is conducted to recognize/ acknowledge the
efforts of Faculty Sponsors and Student Office Bearers of Clubs
and Societies for their commendable efforts in organising the
vast array of events throughout the academic year.
20www.nust.edu.pk
Prospectus 2025
ACCOMMODATION
Girls Hostels
» Fatima Hostels - PG Students
(2 blocks) Single Occupancy with attached
washrooms
» Zainab Hostel
» Ayesha Hostel
» Khadija Hostel
» Amna Hostel
Boys Hostels
» Rumi Hostel PG Students
» Johar Hostel PG Students
» Ammar Hostel PG Students,
» Ghazali UG Students
» Beruni UG Students
» Razi UG Students
» Rahmat UG Students
» Attar UG Students
» Liaquat UG Students
» Hajveri UG Students
» Zakariya UG Students
Monthly Accommodation Charges
(NUST Campus, H-12, Islamabad)
Hostel Accommodation Charges for National Students
» Single occupancy with attached bath Rs. 11000/-
» Double occupancy with attached bath Rs. 10000/-
» Double occupancy with community bath Rs. 8000/-
» Triple occupancy with community bath Rs. 6750/-
Note:
» Security Fee of Rs. 15,000/- (Refundable) will be charged at
the time of allotment.
» Hostel includes accommodation charges only.
Secure Environment
In addition to highly effective Campus security arrangements,
all hostels have CCTV Cameras, protective boundary walls,
security personnel and dedicated staff at each block.
Hostel Management
A qualified and experienced management team, composed as
under, looks after hostel affairs:
» Deputy Director and AD Hostels with Office Staff, Manager
(Hostels) and Caretakers.
» Deputy Director Hostels and AD Hostels (Male & Female)
with Office Staff, Managers (Hostel) and Caretakers
Manager (Hostels) with necessary staff remains available in
each hostel round the clock.
Facilities
Facilities provided in the hostels include:
» Attached / Community washrooms
» Fully furnished rooms
» Central heating system
» High Speed internet connectivity
» Telephone
» Gymnasium, Billiard Table, Table Tennis
» TV lounges with Cable TV
» Dining Halls with attached kitchens and service areas
» Standby Generator
» Laundry Service (Free of Cost)
» Medical Care
» Prayer Area
» Vending Machine
» Water Filtration Plant
The newly built campus at H-12, Islamabad is located in the serene backdrop of majestic Margalla Hills. The NUST Campus,
H-12, Islamabad blends old and modern architecture. The Kashmir Highway, which leads to M-1 (Motorway) linking it to the
rest of the country through a wide range of motorways network, coasts along the campus which is only at 20-minutes drive
from all the main terminals-air, bus and railways.
UG Students
Double / Triple Occupancy
UG Students
Triple Occupancy
NUST Campus, H-12, Islamabad provides well-furnished and equipped male and female hostels named after great Muslim
Scholars as under:
Triple / Double
Occupant with
Community
washrooms
Single Occupancy with
attached washrooms
Double Occupancy with
attached washrooms
21www.nust.edu.pk
Prospectus 2025
Allotment Procedure
Hostel accommodation in the relevant category is allotted as per Hostel
Allotment SoP’s. Newly enrolled students may apply online for hostel
accommodation once their admission is confirmed through following
links:-
ugadmissions.nust.edu.pk (For UG Students)
pgadmission.nust.edu.pk (For PG Students)
Messing
The hostels provide catering services and the boarders have a
choice to enjoy a variety of wholesome food, prepared under
hygienic conditions.
Charges
Mess Security Rs. 15,000/- (Refundable)
Monthly Charges Rs. 15,175 /- (Rs. 490/- per day)
Cafeteria and Shopping Complex
Aesthetically designed cafeterias and shopping complexes,
called Concordia I and Concordia II, have been constructed
in the northern and southern wings of NUST Campus, H-12,
Islamabad. Concordias offer the following services:-
Concordia-I
» Cafeteria
» Mini Mart (Artizm)
» Refreshment Corner
» Stationery Shop
» Photo State / Computer Shop
Concordia-II
» Cafeteria
» Mini Mart
» Stationery Shop
» Photo State / Computer Shop
» Gents Tailor
» Ladies Tailor
» Barber Shop
» Souvenir Shop
» Photocopier Shop
» Beauty Parlor (Near new Sports Complex)
» Retro Café (near Attar Hostels)
» Coffee Lounge (near Grid Station)
» South Edge Café (in front of Main Office)
Shuttle Service
NUST has a very elaborate and very well organized transport
system to cater for the needs of students, faculty and staff alike.
Special emphasis is on environmental friendly transport system.
NUST runs a fleet of Electric Cars within Campus to minimize
carbon emission. Electric Cars are utilized to shuttle between
various locations within the campus i.e. Hostels to various
School/Offices and from Gates to Schools/Hostels/Offices.
NUST also has a very well organized mass transit transport
system for pick and drop of students, faculty and staff from
all localities of twin cities with variable timings. Transport is
also made available to facilitate students for industrial visits,
research projects, club activities, society/community initiatives,
awareness walks and for excursion trips.
Sports and Recreation
NUST offers a wide variety of sports activities. All Colleges
have elaborate sports infrastructure. The NUST Campus, H-12,
Islamabad is developing at a fast pace and have the following
facilities of international standard:-
Indoor Facilities: 2x Multipurpose hall, 2x Basketball, 1x
Volleyball, 6x Badminton, 6x Table Tennis, 2x Snooker, 1x
pool table, 4x Fitness Gyms, 2x Squash Courts, 1x all weather
Swimming Pool, 1x Bowling Alley.
Outdoor Facilities:- 2x Football fields, 5x Cricket grounds,
1x hockey ground, 9x Futsal grounds, 5x Basketball courts,
1x Handball court , 1x Netball court, 9x Volleyball Courts, 4x
Badminton courts, 5x Tennis courts, 1x Skating Rink, 1x Climbing
Wall, 1x Athletic ground, 1x Hiking Trail (1.5 Km).
Hostels Facilities:- 10x Fitness gym, 8x Table Tennis , 6x Pool
Tables, 2x Basketball courts, 1x Volleyball court and 17x
Badminton courts.
NUST has established a Riding Club in H-12 Campus being the
pioneer University in Pakistan to have such a facility. Regular
Inter-College/School Sports Competitions are held every
year at the University. NUST teams have been participating
and performing well in HEC Intervarsity Sports Competition
both at the Zonal and National levels. No of our players have
represented Pakistan in different Sports and achieved good
positions at National Levels.
NUST also has a well qualified and very experienced team of
sports coaches. They impart the sports coaching to students
and supervise all the sports activities in the University.
22www.nust.edu.pk
Prospectus 2025
NUST International Office (NIO)
The NUST International Office (NIO) functions as a pivotal link between the National University of Sciences and Technology (NUST)
and its global partners, providing essential support and services to the NUST community. NUST currently has over 240 partnerships
with international universities and organization of over 50 countries of the world. Embracing a diverse international student
community spanning 19 countries, the NUST International Office (NIO) is committed to providing unwavering support to scholars
on campus. NIO actively collaborates with faculty, staff, and community members to champion international scholarship, foster
research initiatives, and enrich learning experiences both within and outside the traditional classroom setting.
In addition to supporting international students, NIO extends its services to NUST students, offering counseling and guidance
sessions. These sessions are designed to empower NUST students with the information and resources needed to pursue study
abroad opportunities. NIO employs a multifaceted approach, utilizing study fairs, seminars, webinars, and informative sessions
to equip students with the necessary insights and tools for successful international academic pursuits. Through these initiatives,
NIO aims to facilitate a seamless transition for students into the global academic landscape and broaden their horizons through
diverse educational experiences.
Contact Us:
nio@nust.edu.pk
UAN: +92-51-111-11-6878
NUST Placement Office (NPO)
NUST Placement Office aims to facilitate NUST students and graduates in securing placements in the industries matching their
specialization. In order to secure maximum placement opportunities for our grads at the top recruiting companies, we are actively
working jointly with the industry in enhancing placements of NUST students in the market. For yearly summer internships,
mandatory for final year students at NUST, we have an extensive outreach with the industries which provide our students with the
much needed exposure to the potential recruiters. Similarly, for job placements, NPO conducts the largest number of on-campus
recruitment drives, arranges a number of industry sessions and conducts alumni talk series.
Owing to our steep rise in employability during the last 2 years, we have become Pakistan’s no 1 university in Employability.
98th position globally and #1 position in Pakistan
Employers’ Reputation
23www.nust.edu.pk
Prospectus 2025
MEMBERSHIP OF QUALITY ASSURANCE
ASSOCIATIONS/NETWORKS
NUST has actively been playing a role of assuring and enhancing the quality of education since its inception. For the
purpose of learning, knowledge sharing of good practices, global networking and co-organizing international seminars
and networks, NUST is an active member of following international associations / networks
International Network of Quality Assurance
for Higher Education
Asia-Pacific Quality Network
Association of Commonwealth Universities
Association of Management Development Instituti